.. Introduction to NLP.py

============
Introduction
============

NLP.py is a `Python <http://www.python.org>`_ package for numerical `optimization
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mathematical_programming>`_.  It aims to provide
a toolbox for solving `linear
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linear_programming>`_ and `nonlinear programming
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nonlinear_programming>`_ problems that is both
easy to use and extensible.

NLP.py combines the capabilities of the mature `AMPL <http://www.ampl.com>`_
modeling language with the high-quality numerical resources and object-oriented
power of the Python programming language.  This combination makes NLP.py an
excellent tool to prototype and test optimization algorithms, and also a great
teaching aid for optimization.

NLP.py can read optimization problems coded in the AMPL modeling language.  All
aspects of a problem can be examined and the problem solved.  Individual
objective and constraint functions, together with their derivatives (if they
exist) can be accessed transparently through an object-oriented framework.

NLP.py is extensible and new algorithms can be built by assembling the supplied
building blocks, or by creating new building blocks.  Existing building blocks
include procedures for solving symmetric (possibly indefinite) linear systems
via symmetric factorizations or preconditioned iterative solvers, iterative
methods for linear least-squares problems, minimization methods for constrained
and unconstrained optimization, and much more.

Overview
========

NLP.py is a collection of tools and interfaces for implementing and prototyping
optimization algorithms. It is a set of Python modules and classes that support
sparse matrices, nonlinear optimization methods, and the efficient solution of
large sparse linear systems, especially those occuring in the course of
optimization algorithms (e.g., symmetric indefinite systems).

The purpose of NLP.py is to offer an environment in which implementing, testing,
prototyping, experimenting with, and modifying and creating innovative
optimization algorithms for large-scale constrained problems is a moderately
easy task. We feel that the environment should be useful, simple, and intuitive
enough that programmers need only concentrate on the logic of the algorithm
instead of the intricacies of the programming language. We believe that NLP.py is
appropriate for teaching, for learning, and also for bleeding edge research in
large-scale numerical optimization. This is achieved by providing the heavy-duty
number-crunching procedures in fast, low-level languages such as C, Fortran 77,
and Fortran 90/95.

NLP.py aims to

- represent the bleeding edge of research in numerical (differentiable or not)
  optimization,
- provide a number of low-level tools upon which algorithms may be built, with
  the intent of solving potentially large problems,
- use sparse matrix data structures to do so,
- provide tools that are useful in the assessment of the performance of
  optimization algorithms.

Structure of NLP.py
=================

NLP.py is designed as an object-oriented Python layer over lower-level
subprograms. The subprograms, written in C, Fortran 77, and Fortran 90/95,
implement the most numerically-intensive tasks.

These low-level subprograms include MA27 and MA57 for the multifrontal solution
of symmetric linear systems, ICFS for preconditioned conjugate gradients with
limited-memory Cholesky factorization, and GLTR for the solution of trust-region
subproblems, to name a few.

All the sparse matrix capabilities in NLP.py are based on the `Pysparse
<http://pysparse.sf.net>`_ package.

The main purpose of NLP.py is to facilitate access and manipulation of
optimization problems. Therefore, an interface to the AMPL modeling language was
designed. It allows access to components of models and to take advantage of the
automatic differentiation abilities of AMPL.

The above and the design of the Python language combine with interfaces written
in C and in which only pointers are exchanged, leads to an environment suitable
for the efficient solution of large-scale problems.
